Science fiction writer Stanley Schmidt is the new editor of Analog, succeeding another
writer, Ben Boba.
Schmidt's own stories have appeared frequently in Analog, and some are collected in Lifeboat
Earth, published in 1978.
One of his earlier novels is also available, Newton and the Quasi-Apple, which came out
in 1977 in paperback.
Stanley Schmidt has been professor of physics at Heidelberg College in Ohio.
As now devoting, I understand the majority of his time to editing.
I'm sure there's some pluses and minuses to this whole business of being an editor,
Stan, the main minus being you can't devote as much time to your own work.
Isn't that true?
Well, I'm not at all sure that it is in my case because I have never been a full-time
writer, except unless you count the year that I was on a sabbatical when I was teaching.
But most of the time I was either a full-time student or a full-time professor.
And Ben Boba tells me that he thinks that that probably ate up at least as much time
as the editing does.
And I think the editing job is possibly more directly stimulating to the writing.
So his expectation is that I ought to be able to do at least as much writing as I have been.
And so far I venture to hope that that's true.
We have seen no lack of output on his part, so I assume that there's some proof to that.
Yeah.
He may have worked too hard.
He said that he did more writing while he was editor than he ever did before that.
Are you into it now?
You've started already as editor?
Yeah.
I started at the beginning of September, which is interesting because I didn't move into
the New York area until the middle of October.
So for the first month and a half I was probably the only person working in New York City who
was commuting from Tiffin, Ohio.
Do you miss the college campus atmosphere in any way?
There were things about it that I liked, but I'd say there are enough different things
that I like about where I am now that I don't have any regrets.
I'll look for chances to visit occasionally.
Do you expect that eventually you may go back to teaching again?
I have no expectations that far in the future.
Analog is identified as a magazine of science fact as well as science fiction.
Now do you intend to continue this policy?
Yes.
At least in the same way that it is now, and possibly with a slight variation.
The policy so far has been that it's a fact magazine in the sense that it normally has
one factual article per month.
Now a suggestion which I've received from several people in which I'm considering is
adding a sort of science fact newsletter type of column that's shorter, but has one or
This would be a very short thing, but it would be still a little bit of added page space
devoted to fact, which subtracts from what's available for fiction, so I haven't decided
yet whether I want to do it or not.
I can see both advantages and disadvantages in that.
Fortunately, I don't have to decide right away.
Are these factual articles highly technical or are they actually written for the benefit
of the layman?
They're a science fiction fan, if you will.
I would say it's somewhere in between.
For the science fiction fans, yes.
Possibly to some extent a subset of science fiction fans.
I would hesitate to say either technical or for just any layman, because in general the
analog audience tends to be very intelligent and very highly educated.
Most of them have strong technical backgrounds, but they don't all have the same kind of
technical background.
We try to see that the articles are written in such a way as to take advantage of a good
general background, but without anything very specialized or highly technical.
Are the articles commissioned from certain scientists?
Sometimes yes, sometimes no.
We get freelance submissions and sometimes we know somebody would like to do one.
Ask them to.
As an editor, what sorts of things do you look for in a science fiction story?
In other words, how do you begin by judging it?
Well, first of all, I look for good fiction.
And by this, I mean it has to keep my interest on it.
We get so many manuscripts in a week that one of the first things I do is I look for
things that I had to overcome when I started this job was a tendency that I'd carefully
cultivated when I was teaching college.
I did a science fiction course there in which students submitted stories.
And there, every student who submitted something was a paying customer, and I felt obligated
to give every story very careful attention and constructive criticism.
Now with 100 manuscripts a week coming in, I simply can't do that, and so I've had to
resist the temptation to think of careful comments on everything and learn to read
very fast through some things which you can tell at a glance simply aren't well written.
And so it bothered me at first to be flipping through the pages so fast.
But then I realized that the stories which are going to impress readers have to have
something about them which is special enough to keep the reader's mind on the page.
And if the story doesn't keep my mind on the page enough to slow me down and make me pay
more careful attention to it, I probably don't want it.
So the first thing it has to do is be written in such a way that it keeps my interest.
No different, really, from judging any short story, whatever field.
And it has a lot of other things also in common with other short stories.
In a case it has to have good characters and plots that make sense in their own framework.
In fact, science fiction has all the same requirements as any other fiction, plus a few specialized ones,
which are in addition, and the specialized ones are a little bit hard to put into words.
But basically the thing I'm looking here is where does the science fit into it?
There's always some sort of speculative science element in the story.
And this doesn't mean the story is about science.
Usually these days it's more about the impact of the science on people.
But for it to be really science fiction, the kind that I'm looking for, the science has to be so integral to the plot
that if you tried to took the science element out, the whole story would collapse and it couldn't be told.
If you think of some types of things which are often considered science fiction, for instance,
am I allowed to mention a movie by name?
Certainly.
Star Wars is a good Western with great special effects.
I've really called a good comic book a story, but not necessarily a Western.
I would hesitate to call it science fiction.
And to do them credit, I believe I read somewhere that the people who made it said that they never intended it to be science fiction.
But my predecessor was often quite upset about the fact that he thought the public was getting the impression that this was what science fiction is all about.
And it's not because you can take the spaceships and replace them with horses and the lasers and replace them with six guns.
And the story still works essentially the same way.
I'm looking for things in which the scientific elements place such a role that you can't do that if you take the scientific element out.
Nothing is left of the story.
Now some stories have been criticized because they contain what might be termed unscientific propositions or totally inane hypotheses.
Have you ever run across this sort of thing and you have a physics background?
Do you feel that you should judge on the scientific plausibility of any story?
That's certainly a part of it.
If I find something which is demonstrably implausible, I won't take it.
However, the criterion I use for there is a little bit different as a science fiction writer or editor than it is as a physicist.
I would not require that any element which is used in science fiction story be demonstrably possible.
What I do try to require is that it's not provably impossible with present knowledge.
That's a good point.
It's a very strong distinction which is sometimes very hard to get across to people.
For example, that something which is controversial even among people involved in science fiction is faster than light travel.
Is it possible or isn't it?
It's often alleged that the theory of relativity proves that nothing can ever go faster than light.
That particular argument that happens, I don't buy.
I don't find it convincing either as a science fiction writer or a physicist.
But for this reason, I'm perfectly willing to accept that logically it worked out faster than light travel system as part of the story.
This does not mean that I'd necessarily believe that I know that faster than light travel is possible.
I just don't believe I've ever met anybody yet who knows that it isn't.
It seems like most science fiction writers today simply assume that it's possible and then go on from there.
How could you get to some of these other worlds without it, you see?
Well, you could.
For instance, relativity itself provides ways of doing it, but they have such special properties that they greatly restrict the numbers of plots that you can use.
Do you find an awful lot of young writers sending material with this kind of boo-boo in it?
This kind and many other kind.
Yeah.
You know, I've noticed in my own reading that there seems to be a good many stories that have interesting gimmicks to them, if you will, but are just terribly badly written.
Now, if you have this kind of a situation, do you have difficulty in choosing?
You've got a great plot, let's say, but a badly written story.
Well, a little while ago, I think it was before we were actually taping, you asked something about, was I getting completely out of teaching?
Yeah.
And I said, yes, this is true in the sense that I have quit my job at the college in order to take this one.
But in another sense, I haven't, because something which has been very prominent at analog farther back than I can remember firsthand is that one of the most important functions of the editor is to be a teacher, to look for the kind of thing that you see there.
Now, it's a little hard to tell what to do if you get something in that has a really good idea and just plain bad writing.
Bad writing of such a level that it indicates there's nothing you're going to be able to do about it with this writer.
That I pretty much just have to pass up.
But what I'm very much on the lookout for is what the second editor before me, John Campbell, who did an awful lot for the development of science fiction, is editor of this magazine.
He said that the one thing that an editor has to do is to recognize a writer who hasn't learned to write.
And this is something which I'm constantly on the lookout for in the slush pile, the pile of unsolicited manuscripts that come in from people that we don't know anything about.
I'm probably safe to say that most writers have got their start by being found in that pile on somebody's desk with a story that has a good idea and almost but not quite good writing.
The writing may be, it's literate at least, but there's something wrong with the storytelling.
And in that case, I will take considerable pains to write to the editor to try to put into words what bothers me about the story as it stands.
You would give the writer encouragement.
And challenge him to find some way to fix it so that I like it.
I try to avoid suggesting very specific changes.
This is what I learned.
I learned writing from the two previous editors, John Campbell and Ben Bova.
And one of the most striking things about John Campbell's teaching technique to me was that he never told me how to change a story.
He always said what was wrong with it, which is very hard to put into words sometimes.
Sometimes it took me two days to figure out what he was saying in a letter, and then left it to me to figure out how to fix it.
And I think I learned far more that way than by going through motions that he had spelled out.
You mentioned the fact that you taught a science fiction course, and obviously there are more and more of that sort of course on college campuses around the country.
You think they are going to be of real help in improving the quality of writing and science fiction writing in particular?
Some of them will. A far larger number are unlikely to.
In other words, you have it or you don't.
There are a number of scary things about this.
There are a lot of people in the science fiction business who are not at all sure they are too happy about the sudden academic respectability.
Particularly since in some cases it becomes a matter of it being a fad.
Science fiction courses are being offered in some places.
Not all. There are some excellent courses being given.
But I know that there are courses being given in some places simply because somebody besides the school over there has one, we have to have one too, and we need somebody to teach it.
A couple of years ago a friend of mine called me up and said, help.
And I asked for elaboration on this point.
And she said, I've just been told that I'm going to teach a course in science fiction.
And I said that I don't know anything about science fiction, and they said don't change the subject.
And so she wanted to know if she could sit on a high course and try to learn something as she went.
Now she at least was conscientious enough to try to learn something about it as she went.
But there's a big background there. You can't become familiar with it that fast.
That certainly would be the fad element that would end with it.
We need a science fiction course that would look around for somebody who is, let's say, in the English department.
Also, I think very few of the courses are taught by actual writers.
Most courses are taught from a critics viewpoint rather than a writer's.
And critics and writers tend to see things in fundamentally different ways.
Even when the same person is active as both, he has a different set of ways of looking at things when he's acting as each one.
You know, that's an interesting point.
There aren't, or at least I have seldom read, good criticism of science fiction stories.
Is there any such critic who is writing?
There are a few. There are probably more now than before.
There are also some others that I wouldn't want to recommend, but there's James Blish, A.J. Budris.
I think Theodore Sturgeon has done some.
But it's a field that seems to me there could be more done in, would be helpful.
Yeah.
Were you a physicist before you were a writer or vice versa, or did they both develop side by side?
Well, let's see.
At what point do I qualify as a writer or a physicist?
I sold my first stories while I was in graduate school as a physicist, before I got the graduate degree, before I was employed as a physicist.
But I already had the undergraduate degree.
So, I don't know.
Would you say that the physics had been really tremendously helpful to you as a science fiction writer?
Could you have done as well, perhaps, if your background was in biology or some non-science?
A science fiction writer has to have some background in virtually all fields.
That's one of the things that makes it so interesting to me.
Can you pick that up from just reading, or do you really have to study the field?
You may have to read about it in quite a bit of depth.
And I think there is a tendency to be able to treat things with a kind of depth that you do have the deeper background in, that you couldn't with other fields.
So, I could have had some other kind of background, and I might have done as well at writing, but I couldn't have written the same stories.
For instance, Lifeboat Earth, in a sense it's a collection of stories.
Really, the stories all form one larger story.
As a matter of fact, that book itself forms part of a still larger story.
But the Lifeboat Earth sequence itself is one that I don't see how somebody without a pretty fair knowledge of physics and astronomy could have even attempted to write.
Because I had to do a lot of very detailed working out of background.
That's a good example, by the way, of one of the things that I try to stress.
You were asking what kinds of things I look for in stories, and I was talking about how the science fits into the fiction.
Let me put it another way.
I'm looking for stories which are people stories, but they're about people and situations which grow directly out of the speculative elements in such a way that you can't separate the two.
Lifeboat Earth is an example of this.
It's very much a people story, but the situation that the people find themselves in is that as the result of a core explosion in this galaxy,
which this was mentioned in an earlier book, actually, Lifeboat Earth is a sequel to a novel called The Sins of the Fathers.
Anyway, in Lifeboat Earth, with the aid of some intelligent extraterrestrials, Earth itself is being used as a sort of a spaceship,
and it's being moved to another galaxy to escape the core explosion in this galaxy.
And so what I have is a story of people set against the background of all the changes that are occurring in the Earth as a result of this trip.
Now, I don't know how well I've succeeded, but to even hope to be halfway convincing about this, you have to be able to work out what some of those changes would be.
And some of them are quite different from what you might expect intuitively.
And I know I put a lot of work into doing that.
Some of it was involved enough that at one point I went out and bought a programmable pocket calculator so that it could work out some of the astronomical background of it for me.
Now, there's an idea like that. Is that generated possibly by something you had read in a physics book or studied in a technical manual of some part?
Or did it start out more with the people situation of what if type of thing?
I want to remember this whole thing, which so far is up to about 150,000 words and still growing.
Originally started out as a very insignificant short story, which a good editor bounced and said, but now what can you build on it?
See, being on both sides of the fence, I can even admit from the writer's viewpoint that editors are sometimes good for something.
I believe there I had one technical idea, and I didn't really know what to do with it.
The technical idea there is one that doesn't even show up in what I mentioned so far.
It's just the idea that if you had a way of traveling faster than light, you could intercept radio messages, for instance, which you had missed the first time around because your receiver wasn't working just by going out and catching up with them.
That was the basis of the original insignificant short story.
And that got combined with some other things. There was another idea that I had had independently that the question of suppose somebody told us that the earth and could more or less prove that the earth was going to become uninhabitable in a certain relative way.
A relatively small number of years. What, if anything, would we do about it?
And the whole situation that is now in the verge of becoming a trilogy grew out of those two ideas coming together.
This is something which has happened to me a couple of times, and I know it happens to other writers too, that sometimes you have two ideas, neither one of which will do anything by itself.
But if you put them together, they write a story almost spontaneously.
Do you feel when you're writing a story like that, that it is totally separated from current reality, or are you influenced by real contemporary threats to our civilization?
It can vary. It depends on a lot on the individual story. I'd say this one was more influenced by contemporary things because it's a relatively near future story.
I wasn't thinking of it particularly in response to any present threats, although in another sense I could see where you could draw if you wanted to some sort of allegorical connection.
Because this type of problem is very similar to a lot of the problems that science fiction writers have been talking about for years, and normal people are just now beginning to realize they really have to think about.
That is the type of long range problem, which you don't need a solution to right now, but it's so big that even if you start right now, you're going to be hard put to have a solution by the time you need it.
And the newspapers every day are full of problems of that type now.
The market for short stories in general has been shrinking over the years. Do you think that analog for one has a very important role to play in preserving a market for the short story?
Yes, as a matter of fact, it has shrumped to the point where science fiction magazines may well be the biggest market for short stories.
But there are so few of them at this point that we're getting a sort of a positive feedback, vicious circle type of thing, where there are so few markets and usually such low paying markets for short stories
that most writers, after they become a little bit experienced and a little bit known, realize that if they're going to make any money, short stories aren't the way to do it.
And they pretty much quit writing short stories and go off and write novels instead.
Not always as good as their short stories.
No, some people can handle one very well, not the other.
Do you think there's any hope for the short story in magazine form in the future?
I hope so. I'd like to see the market for it expand.
Thank you very much for talking with us today. Stanley Schmidt, Science Fiction Writer and new editor of the magazine Analog. Thank you very much.